Add a compute shader bonus chapter (#4)
KhronosGroup/VulkanTutorial: en/11_Compute_Shader.md

This opens up the world of general purpose computing on graphics processor units (GPGPU), no matter where your application is running. GPGPU means that you can do general computations on your GPU, something that has traditionally been a domain of CPUs. But with GPUs having become more and more powerful and more flexible, many workloads that would require the general purpose capabilities of a CPU can now be done on the GPU in realtime.

A few examples of where the compute capabilities of a GPU can be used are image manipulation, visibility testing, post processing, advanced lighting calculations, animations, physics (e.g. for a particle system) and much more. And it's even possible to use compute for non-visual computational only work that does not require any graphics output, e.g. number crunching or AI related things. This is called "headless compute".

## Advantages

> Doing computationally expensive calculations on the GPU has several advantages. The most obvious one is offloading work from the CPU. Another one is not requiring a round-trip to the CPU and it's main memory, so all data can stay on the GPU without having to resolve to slow main memory reads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Doing computationally expensive calculations on the GPU has several advantages. The most obvious one is offloading work from the CPU. Another one is not requiring moving data between the CPU's main memory and the GPU's memory. All of the data can stay on the GPU without having to wait for slow transfers from main memory.
```

> Aside from these, GPUs are heavily parallelized with some of them having tens of thousands of small compute units. This often makes them a better fit for highly parallel workflows than a CPU with a few large units.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aside from these, GPUs are heavily parallelized with some of them having tens of thousands of small compute units. This often makes them a better fit for highly parallel workflows than a CPU with a few large compute units.
```

## The Vulkan pipeline

> It's important to know that compute is completely separated from the graphics part of the pipeline. This is visible in the following block diagram of the Vulkan pipeline from the official specification:

Reviewer: "The Vulkan Pipeline" is a concept that I am note sure is one readers are familiar with. The introduction chapter and graphics pipeline chapter all refer to the graphics pipeline, and do not refer to a concept that doesn't also include graphics somehow.

Author: Good point. Maybe a different caption like "Where does compute fit into compute?" would be better here?

![](/images/vulkan_pipeline_block_diagram.png)

In this diagram we can see the traditional graphics part of the pipeline on the left, and several stages on the right that are not part of this graphics pipeline, including the compute shader (stage). With the compute shader stage being detached from the graphics pipeline we'll be able to use it anywhere we see fit. This is very different from e.g. the fragment shader which is always applied to the transformed output of the vertex shader.

The center of the diagram also shows that e.g. descriptor sets are also used by compute, so everything we learned about descriptors layouts, descriptor sets and descriptors also applies here.

## An example

> An easy to understand example that we implement in this chapter is a GPU based particle system. Such systems are used in many games and often consist of thousands of particles that need to be updated at interactive frame rates. And sometimes even with complex physics applied, e.g. when testing for collisions. So rendering such a system requires vertices (passed as vertex buffers) and a way to update them based on some equation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An easy to understand example that we will implement in this chapter is a GPU based particle system. Such systems are used in many games and often consist of thousands of particles that need to be updated at interactive frame rates. Rendering such a system requires 2 main components: vertices, passed as vertex buffers, and a way to update them based on some equation.
```
(Dropping the sentence since it doesn't add much and greatly interrupts the flow)

> A "classical" CPU based particle system would store particles in the system's main memory and then use the CPU to update them. After the update, the vertices need to be transferred to the GPU's memory again so it will display the updated particles in the next frame. The most straight-forward way would be recreating the vertex buffer with the new data for each frame. This is obviously very costly. Depending on your implementation, there are other options like mapping GPU memory so it can be written by the CPU (called "resizable BAR" on desktop systems, or unified memory on integrated GPUs) or just using a host local buffer (which would be the slowest method due to PCI-E bandwidth). But no matter what buffer update you choose, you always require a "round-trip" to the CPU to update the particles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "classical" CPU based particle system would store particle data in the system's main memory and then use the CPU to update them. After the update, the vertices need to be transferred to the GPU's memory again so it can display the updated particles in the next frame. The most straight-forward way would be recreating the vertex buffer with the new data for each frame. This is obviously very costly. Depending on your implementation, there are other options like mapping GPU memory so it can be written by the CPU (called "resizable BAR" on desktop systems, or unified memory on integrated GPUs) or just using a host local buffer (which would be the slowest method due to PCI-E bandwidth). But no matter what buffer update method you choose, you always require a "round-trip" to the CPU to update the particles.
```

> With a GPU based particle system, this round-trip is no longer required. Vertices are only uploaded to the GPU once and all updates are done in the GPU's memory by using compute shaders. One of the main reasons why this is faster is the much higher bandwidth between the GPU and it's local memory. In a CPU based scenario, you'd be limited by main memory and PCI-express bandwidth, which is often just a fraction of the GPU's memory bandwidth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With a GPU based particle system, this round-trip is no longer required. Vertices are only uploaded to the GPU at the start and all updates are done in the GPU's memory using compute shaders. One of the main reasons why this is faster is the much higher bandwidth between the GPU and it's local memory. In a CPU based scenario, you'd be limited by main memory and PCI-express bandwidth, which is often just a fraction of the GPU's memory bandwidth.
```

When doing this on a GPU with a dedicated compute queue, you can update particles in parallel to the rendering part of the graphics pipeline. This is called "async compute", and is an advanced topic not covered in this tutorial.

Here is a screenshot from this chapter's code. The particles shown here are updated by a compute shader directly on the GPU, without any CPU interaction:

![](/images/compute_shader_particles.png)

## Data manipulation

In this tutorial we already learned about different buffer types like vertex and index buffers for passing primitives and uniform buffers for passing data to a shader. And we also used images do to texture mapping. But up until know, we always wrote data using the CPU and only did reads on the GPU.

An important concept introduced with compute shaders is the ability to arbitrarily read from **and write to** buffers. For this, Vulkan offers two dedicated storage types.

### Shader storage buffer objects (SSBO)

> A shader storage buffer (SSBO) allows you to read from and write to a buffer. Using these is similar to using uniform buffer objects. The biggest differences are that you can alias other buffer types to SSBOs and that they can be arbitrarily large.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A shader storage buffer (SSBO) allows shaders to read from and write to a buffer. Using these is similar to using uniform buffer objects. The biggest differences are that you can alias other buffer types to SSBOs and that they can be arbitrarily large.
```

But that's not the case. In Vulkan you can specify multiple usages for buffers and images. So for the particle vertex buffer to be used as a vertex buffer (in the graphics pass) and as a storage buffer (in the compute pass), you simply create the buffer with those two usage flags:

```c++
VkBufferCreateInfo bufferInfo{};
...
bufferInfo.usage = VK_BUFFER_USAGE_VERTEX_BUFFER_BIT | VK_BUFFER_USAGE_STORAGE_BUFFER_BIT | VK_BUFFER_USAGE_TRANSFER_DST_BIT;
...

if (vkCreateBuffer(device, &bufferInfo, nullptr, &shaderStorageBuffers[i]) != VK_SUCCESS) {
    throw std::runtime_error("failed to create vertex buffer!");
}
```
The two flags `VK_BUFFER_USAGE_VERTEX_BUFFER_BIT` and `VK_BUFFER_USAGE_STORAGE_BUFFER_BIT` set with `bufferInfo.usage` tell the implementation that we want to use this buffer for two different scenarios: as a vertex buffer in the vertex shader and as a store buffer. Note that we also added the `VK_BUFFER_USAGE_TRANSFER_DST_BIT` flag in here so we can transfer data from the host to the GPU. This is crucial as we want the shader storage buffer to stay in GPU memory only (`VK_MEMORY_PROPERTY_DEVICE_LOCAL_BIT`) we need to to transfer data from the host to this buffer.

> Here is the same code using using the `createBuffer` helper function:

Reviewer: I have a feeling introducing too much code at this stage in the tutorial is counter productive. The current section is "the two ways to read/write data in compute shaders: SSBO's and Images". Thus, the bits describing `createBuffer`, adding variables to hold the VkBuffer & VkDeviceMemory in accordance to frames in flight, and the actual initialization function should happen later on.

Author: That's a good point. I'll try to move the code heavy parts down the line so they're closer to the other parts of the actual tutorial.

Author: I have restructured this a bit. I moved most of the relevant code further down right before how descriptors are setup, so that this chapter at the beginning isn't too code heavy and similar to the storage image one.

```c++
createBuffer(bufferSize, VK_BUFFER_USAGE_STORAGE_BUFFER_BIT | VK_BUFFER_USAGE_VERTEX_BUFFER_BIT | VK_BUFFER_USAGE_TRANSFER_DST_BIT, VK_MEMORY_PROPERTY_DEVICE_LOCAL_BIT, shaderStorageBuffers[i], shaderStorageBuffersMemory[i]);
```

In the [frames in flight](03_Drawing_a_triangle/03_Drawing/03_Frames_in_flight.md) chapter we talked about duplicating resources per frame in flight, so we can keep the CPU and the GPU busy. Here, we'll also create one shader storage buffer per frame and upload the initial particle data to those buffers:

```c++
std::vector<VkBuffer> shaderStorageBuffers;
std::vector<VkDeviceMemory> shaderStorageBuffersMemory;

...

void createShaderStorageBuffers() {

>     ...

Reviewer: This is a new function, there is no need for an ellipsis (...) to indicate adding to other code.

Author: Yeah, but the actual sample code has some lines of code before what's shown here. hat's why I put the ellipsis in here.

    shaderStorageBuffers.resize(MAX_FRAMES_IN_FLIGHT);
    shaderStorageBuffersMemory.resize(MAX_FRAMES_IN_FLIGHT);

    for (size_t i = 0; i < MAX_FRAMES_IN_FLIGHT; i++) {
        createBuffer(bufferSize, VK_BUFFER_USAGE_STORAGE_BUFFER_BIT | VK_BUFFER_USAGE_VERTEX_BUFFER_BIT | VK_BUFFER_USAGE_TRANSFER_DST_BIT, VK_MEMORY_PROPERTY_DEVICE_LOCAL_BIT, shaderStorageBuffers[i], shaderStorageBuffersMemory[i]);

>         copyBuffer(stagingBuffer, shaderStorageBuffers[i], bufferSize);

Reviewer: Where does stagingBuffer get defined? More importantly, does it have enough space to accomodate the upload? Also this implies there is 'starting' data to upload which hasn't been discussed at this point in the chapter.

Author: That's true. I've added the relevant parts from the sample code so people can easily follow what happens. Also added some code comments.

    }
}
```

The GLSL shader declaration for accessing such a buffer looks like this:

> ```glsl

Reviewer: The glsl code here is fine however, since it highlights 'how to use ssbo's in shaders.

struct Particle {
  vec2 position;
  vec2 velocity;
  vec4 color;
};

layout(std140, binding = 1) readonly buffer ParticleSSBOIn {
   Particle particlesIn[ ];
};

layout(std140, binding = 2) buffer ParticleSSBOOut {
   Particle particlesOut[ ];
};
```

In this example we have a typed SSBO with each particle having a position and velocity value (see the `Particle` struct). The SSBO then contains an unbound number of particles as marked by the `[]`. Not having to specify the number of elements in an SSBO is one of the advantages over e.g. uniform buffers.

Writing to such a storage buffer object in the compute shader is straight-forward and similar to how you'd write to the buffer on the C++ side:

```glsl
particlesOut[index].position = particlesIn[index].position + particlesIn[index].velocity.xy * ubo.deltaTime;
```

### Storage images

A storage image allows you read from and write to an image. Typical use cases are applying image effects to textures or doing post processing (which in turn is very similar).

> This is similar for images:

Reviewer: This refers to what here?

```c++
VkImageCreateInfo imageInfo {};
...
imageInfo.usage = VK_IMAGE_USAGE_SAMPLED_BIT | VK_IMAGE_USAGE_STORAGE_BIT;
...

if (vkCreateImage(device, &imageInfo, nullptr, &textureImage) != VK_SUCCESS) {
    throw std::runtime_error("failed to create image!");
}
```

> The two flags `VK_IMAGE_USAGE_SAMPLED_BIT` and `VK_IMAGE_USAGE_STORAGE_BIT` set with `bufferInfo.usage` tell the implementation that we want to use this image for two different scenarios: as an image sampled in the fragment shader and as a storage image in the computer shader;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The two flags `VK_IMAGE_USAGE_SAMPLED_BIT` and `VK_IMAGE_USAGE_STORAGE_BIT` set with `imageInfo.usage` tell the implementation that we want to use this image for two different scenarios: as an image sampled in the fragment shader and as a storage image in the computer shader;
```

The GLSL shader declaration for storage image looks similar to sampled images used e.g. in the fragment shader:

```glsl
layout (binding = 0, rgba8) uniform readonly image2D inputImage;
layout (binding = 1, rgba8) uniform writeonly image2D outputImage;
```

> A few differences here are additional attributes like `rgba8` for the format of the image, the `readonly` and `writeonly` qualifiers, telling the implementation that we'll only read from the input and write to the output image. And last but not least we need to use the `image2D` type do declare a storage image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A few differences here are additional attributes like `rgba8` for the format of the image, the `readonly` and `writeonly` qualifiers, telling the implementation that we will only read from the input image and write to the output image. And last but not least we need to use the `image2D` type to declare a storage image.
```

Reading from and writing to storage images in the compute shader is then done using `imageLoad` and `imageStore`: 

```glsl
vec3 pixel = imageLoad(inputImage, ivec2(gl_GlobalInvocationID.xy)).rgb;
imageStore(outputImage, ivec2(gl_GlobalInvocationID.xy), pixel);
```

## Compute queue families

> In the [physical device and queue families chapter](03_Drawing_a_triangle/00_Setup/03_Physical_devices_and_queue_families.md#page_Queue-families) we already learned about queue families and how to select a graphics queue family. Compute introduces the new queue family type bit `VK_QUEUE_COMPUTE_BIT`. So if we want to do compute, we need to get a queue from a queue family type that supports compute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the [physical device and queue families chapter](03_Drawing_a_triangle/00_Setup/03_Physical_devices_and_queue_families.md#page_Queue-families) we already learned about queue families and how to select a graphics queue family. Compute uses the queue family properties flag bit `VK_QUEUE_COMPUTE_BIT`. So if we want to do compute work, we need to get a queue from a queue family that supports compute.
```

> Note that Vulkan requires an implementation that supports graphics operations to have at least one queue family that supports both graphics and compute, but it's also possible that implementations offer a dedicated compute queue. This dedicated compute queue (that does not have the graphics bit) hints at an asynchronous compute queue. To keep this tutorial beginner friendly though, we'll use a queue that can do both graphics and compute. This will also save us some advanced synchronization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that Vulkan requires an implementation which supports graphics operations to have at least one queue family that supports both graphics and compute operations, but it's also possible that implementations offer a dedicated compute queue. This dedicated compute queue (that does not have the graphics bit) hints at an asynchronous compute queue. To keep this tutorial beginner friendly though, we'll use a queue that can do both graphics and compute operations. This will also save us from dealing with several advanced synchronization mechanisms.
```

> So for our compute sample we need to change the device creation code a bit:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For our compute sample we need to change the device creation code a bit:
```

```c++
uint32_t queueFamilyCount = 0;
vkGetPhysicalDeviceQueueFamilyProperties(device, &queueFamilyCount, nullptr);

std::vector<VkQueueFamilyProperties> queueFamilies(queueFamilyCount);
vkGetPhysicalDeviceQueueFamilyProperties(device, &queueFamilyCount, queueFamilies.data());

int i = 0;
for (const auto& queueFamily : queueFamilies) {
    if ((queueFamily.queueFlags & VK_QUEUE_GRAPHICS_BIT) && (queueFamily.queueFlags & VK_QUEUE_COMPUTE_BIT)) {

>         indices.graphicsAndComputeFamily = i;

Reviewer: Maybe show changing the struct member name as well? Also maybe should the queue be renamed to graphicsAndCompute?

Author: Not sure on this. There is already a graphicsQueue in there, so I thought it would be better to just name it computeQueue so people don't get too confused?

    }

    i++;
}
```

The changed queue family index selection code will now try to find a queue family that supports both graphics and compute. 

We can then get a compute queue from this queue family in `createLogicalDevice`:

```c++

> vkGetDeviceQueue(device, indices.graphicsAndComputeFamily.value(), 0, &computeQueue);

Reviewer: Same as above, may need to change the name here.

    storageBufferInfoCurrentFrame.buffer = shaderStorageBuffers[i];
    storageBufferInfoCurrentFrame.offset = 0;
    storageBufferInfoCurrentFrame.range = sizeof(Particle) * PARTICLE_COUNT;

    descriptorWrites[2].sType = VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_WRITE_DESCRIPTOR_SET;
    descriptorWrites[2].dstSet = computeDescriptorSets[i];
    descriptorWrites[2].dstBinding = 2;
    descriptorWrites[2].dstArrayElement = 0;
    descriptorWrites[2].descriptorType = VK_DESCRIPTOR_TYPE_STORAGE_BUFFER;
    descriptorWrites[2].descriptorCount = 1;
    descriptorWrites[2].pBufferInfo = &storageBufferInfoCurrentFrame;

    vkUpdateDescriptorSets(device, 3, descriptorWrites.data(), 0, nullptr);
}
```

Remember that we also have to request the descriptor types for the SSBOs from our descriptor pool:

```c++
std::array<VkDescriptorPoolSize, 2> poolSizes{};
...

poolSizes[1].type = VK_DESCRIPTOR_TYPE_STORAGE_BUFFER;
poolSizes[1].descriptorCount = static_cast<uint32_t>(MAX_FRAMES_IN_FLIGHT) * 2;
```

We need to double the number of `VK_DESCRIPTOR_TYPE_STORAGE_BUFFER` types requested from the pool by two because our sets reference the SSBOs of the last and current frame.

## Compute pipelines

> As compute is not a part of the graphics pipeline, we can't use `vkCreateGraphicsPipelines` to attach the compute shader to it. Instead we need to create a dedicated compute pipeline `vkCreateComputePipelines` for running our compute commands. Since a compute pipeline does not touch any of the rasterization state, it has a lot less state than a graphics pipeline:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As compute is not a part of the graphics pipeline, we can't use `vkCreateGraphicsPipelines`. Instead we need to create a dedicated compute pipeline with `vkCreateComputePipelines` for running our compute commands. Since a compute pipeline does not touch any of the rasterization state, it has a lot less state than a graphics pipeline:
```

```c++
VkComputePipelineCreateInfo pipelineInfo{};
pipelineInfo.sType = VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_COMPUTE_PIPELINE_CREATE_INFO;
pipelineInfo.layout = computePipelineLayout;
pipelineInfo.stage = computeShaderStageInfo;

if (vkCreateComputePipelines(device, VK_NULL_HANDLE, 1, &pipelineInfo, nullptr, &computePipeline) != VK_SUCCESS) {
    throw std::runtime_error("failed to create compute pipeline!");
}
```

The setup is a lot simpler, as we only require one shader stage and a pipeline layout. The pipeline layout works the same as with the graphics pipeline:

```c++
VkPipelineLayoutCreateInfo pipelineLayoutInfo{};
pipelineLayoutInfo.sType = VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_PIPELINE_LAYOUT_CREATE_INFO;
pipelineLayoutInfo.setLayoutCount = 1;
pipelineLayoutInfo.pSetLayouts = &computeDescriptorSetLayout;

if (vkCreatePipelineLayout(device, &pipelineLayoutInfo, nullptr, &computePipelineLayout) != VK_SUCCESS) {
    throw std::runtime_error("failed to create compute pipeline layout!");
}
```

## Compute space

> Before we get into how a compute shader works and how we submit compute workloads to the GPU, we need to talk about two important compute concepts: **work groups** and **invocations**. They define an abstract execution model for how compute workloads are processed by the compute hardware of the GPU in three dimensions (x,y and z).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we get into how a compute shader works and how we submit compute workloads to the GPU, we need to talk about two important compute concepts: **work groups** and **invocations**. They define an abstract execution model for how compute workloads are processed by the compute hardware of the GPU in three dimensions (x, y, and z).
```
(oxford comma)

**Work groups** define how the compute workloads are formed and processed by the the compute hardware of the GPU. You can think of them as work items the GPU has to work through. Work group dimensions are set by the application at command buffer time using a dispatch command.

> And each work group then is a collection of **invocations** that execute the same compute shader. Invocations can potentially run in parallel and their dimensions are set in the compute shader. Invocations within a single workgroup have access to shared memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each work group is a collection of **invocations** that all execute the same compute shader. Invocations can potentially run in parallel and their dimensions are set inside the compute shader. Invocations within a single workgroup have access to shared memory.
```
Shared memory is not something that has been defined above nor seems to have a definition below. Either there should be a clarification of what shared memory is here or removal of the sentence "Invocations ... have access to shared memory".

Author: That's right. Does this make more sense?

"One thing that's unique to compute is that invocations within a single workgroup can share variables using shared memory. This is an advanced concept not shown in this tutorial though."

This image shows the relation between these two in three dimensions:

> ![](/images/compute_space.svg)

Reviewer: Maybe this image should have `Dispatch [3,3,3]`, indicating that its a 3x3x3 dispatch? What I'm thinking is that there is no obvious indication of why there is a 3 wide cube being shown.

Similar thought applies to the invocations.

Author: So something like this?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/10283127/206767821-49c03b6b-8077-4501-807b-8fc365978ad3.png)

The number of dimensions for work groups and invocations depends on how input data is structured. If you e.g. work on a one-dimensional array, like we do in this chapter, you only have to specify the x dimension for both.

> As an example: If we dispatch a work group count of [64, 1, 1] with a compute shader local size of [32, 32, ,1], our compute shader will be invoked 64 x 32 x 32 = 65,536 times.

Reviewer: I don't think its obvious that `local size` refers to the invocations.

Author: I have clarified this a bit.

> Note that the max. count for work groups and local sizes differs from implementation to implementation, so you should always check the compute related limits in `VkPhysicalDeviceLimits`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the maximum count for work groups and local sizes differs from implementation to implementation, so you should always check the compute related limits in `VkPhysicalDeviceLimits`.
```
Maybe we should mention the exact limits that need to be used?  `maxComputeWorkGroupCount` `maxComputeWorkGroupInvocations` and `maxComputeWorkGroupSize` are the three related ones I see.

But this is your call, not a necessary change.

Author: That's actually a good point. Since I already mention `VkPhysicalDeviceLimits` it makes sense to put in the actual limit names.

This is necessary as even though the two submits are ordered one-after-another, there is no guarantee that they execute on the GPU in this order. Adding in wait and signal semaphores ensures this execution order.

So we first add a new set of synchronization primitives for the compute work in `createSyncObjects`. The compute fences, just like the graphics fences, are created in the signaled state because otherwise, the first draw would time out while waiting for the fences to be signaled as detailed [here](03_Drawing_a_triangle/03_Drawing/02_Rendering_and_presentation.md#page_Waiting-for-the-previous-frame):

```c++
std::vector<VkFence> computeInFlightFences;
std::vector<VkSemaphore> computeFinishedSemaphores;
...

> computeFinishedSemaphores.resize(MAX_FRAMES_IN_FLIGHT);

Reviewer: No resize for the computeInFlightFences?

Author: Good catch. The sample code actually does this, just forgot to add it to the tutorial.
